---
layout: post
title: Go 1.23 Iterators
categories:
    - golang
tags:
    - golang
    - iterators
---

Reading [Why People are Angry over Go 1.23 Iterators](https://www.gingerbill.org/article/2024/06/17/go-iterator-design/) (or having [thePrimeagen](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CCxjt-dOL0U&ab_channel=ThePrimeTime) read it) stirred the following idea.

I think this little adapter converts what thePrimeagen was thinking about with "iterable interfaces", to what Russ Cox (rsc) and the go team are actually planning on using in go 1.23: functional iterators.

```go
type Iterable[V any] interface {
    Init()
    Next() (V, bool)
    Done()
}

func New[V any](core Iterable[V]) iter.Seq[V] {
    return nil // TODO
}
```

<!--more-->

## Background

The go team is looking to add iterable types to the language.
Folks were expecting an interface to enable `for range`-based iteration over custom types.
Instead, the go team is using a new type `iter.Seq` or `iter.Seq2`; And it's not quite what folks were expecting.

The `iter.Seq` (or it's sibling `iter.Seq2`) are defined by the about-to-be-added [`iter`](https://pkg.go.dev/iter@master) package as:

```go
type (
	Seq[V any]     func(yield func(V) bool)
	Seq2[K, V any] func(yield func(K, V) bool)
)
```

Here the go team is looking to support `for v := range myIterable` and `for k, v := range myIterable` syntax.
While the usage these iterable types is fairly simple, the implementation is a bit more complex.

The crux of the problem is that there is a bit of a control flow issue, the `for range` loop needs to be able to control the iteration, but the iterator needs to be able to control the loop.
To do this, the `Seq*` types are functions that take a function that is called for each value in the sequence.
The function passed to the `Seq*` type is called a "yield" function.
Yield returns a bool indicating if the loop should continue or not.

Whew, that's kind of a lot to take in.
But, generally speaking, there are a lot of good things packed into this design.

By having the iterator itself be a function, it can use `defer` to clean up resources when the loop is done.
This is a subtle, but powerful side-effect of the design; one of those strategic decisions that comes from minds that have been doing this for a long time.

## The Adapter

I've roughed out a bit of "glue code" that can be written to convert what folks were expecting to what the go team is actually doing.

```go
type Iterable[V any] interface {
    Init()
    Next() (V, bool)
    Done()
}

func Walk[V any](core Iterable[V]) iter.Seq[V] {
	return func(yield func(V) bool) bool {
		core.Init()
		defer core.Done()
		for {
			v, done := core.Next()
			if !done {
				return true
			}
			if !yield(v) {
				return false
			}
		}
	}
}
```

The `Iterable` is the interface that thePrimeagen was thinking about.
It's a simple interface that has three methods: `Init`, `Next`, and `Done`.
The `Init` method is called once before any calls to `Next` to initialize the iterator.
The `Next` method returns the next value in the sequence and a boolean indicating if there are more values.
The `Done` method is called after the last call to `Next`.

Oh, and what about `Seq2`, well... we will need another interface and constructor for that.

```go
type Iterable2[V any] interface {
    Init()
    Next() (V, bool)
    Done()
}

func Walk2[K, V any](core Iterable2[K, V]) iter.Seq2[K, V] {
	return func(yield func(K, V) bool) bool {
		core.Init()
		defer core.Done()
		for {
			k, v, done := core.Next()
			if !done {
				return true
			}
			if !yield(k, v) {
				return false
			}
		}
	}
}
```

## Conclusion

Now, I haven't put a *ton* of thought into this, but I think it's a simple enough bit of code.
I'm sure there are some optimizations that could be made, or some deep/technical concept that I'm missing.
But, I think it gets the point across.

I'm fairly certain that this was already considered by the go-team, and they decided to go with the `Seq*` types for a good reason.
But, I didn't see any harm in sharing this with you all.

Best of luck with your Go 1.23 adventures!

<style>
pre {
    tab-size: 4;
    text-align: left;
}
</style>
